

The Earth Beneath, the Sky Above
Colin Berry (M0GXV)
September 2019

Topics

The loop antenna revisited
physically more robust
Separate tuning capacitor and coupler, and pully
Use on 10MHz band, (CW without the contesting)

Theory: skin effect, bad joints, dielectric losses
Didn't explain the bandwidth / Q

Theory vs practice - where has all the power gone?

Experimental evidence:
Orientation indoors - radiator, window frame
Proximity of lossy coil of wire
Thermally coated conservatory windows
height above ground
orientation above ground
Thermal heating - trivial

Conclusion - absorption by nearby materials
Articles on internet suggest typical soil parameters and effect on dipole

Basic experimental approach
1. Measure the loop and feed into model
2. Calculate reactance and resistance (skin effect and radiation)
3. Attach antenna analyser via short patch lead
4. Tune loop to chosen frequency and adjust coupling to get 50 ohms
5. Measure bandwidth (where SWR is 2.62)
6. Calculate Q and hence total loop resistance
7. Change height above ground and measure impedance at new resonance - or new bandwidth
8. Try to explain the observations

Could try different parameters to get model to reproduce observations, but also can assess overall radiated power, and hence deduce absorption

Discoveries:

Radiation resistance varies between perfect ground and free space
Length of transmission line determines how coupling changes resonant impedance
NEC modelling program underestimates earth losses when close to ground

More fundamental ideas considered:
Coupling to earth via displacement currents (varying charges)
Eddy currents induced by varying magnetic field
Subjective estimates of dimensions
Equivalent circuits
Spreadsheet models

Refractive model - reflection, transmission, absorption
Boundary conditions for E and H
Analogy with transmission line load mismatch
Imperfect ground - complex permittivity
Evanescence and skin depth

Typical ground parameters and variation with frequency
HF and microwave
Loss coefficient

Experimental results and analysis from US
NEC model results - horizontal dipoles

Radiation pattern - 4 directions (22BS, 45BS, 22P, 45P, V + assumed zero H)
Reduction in low angle radiation, increase in near-vertical

Other models considered:

inverted V
inverted V with reflector

Near-vertical incidence skywave propagation
Reasons for using it
absorption, reflection and transmission
Negative refractive index in plasma
Effect of F layer - critical frequency and MUF
Effect of D layer - absorption varies with angle, frequency and daylight
Above/below 10MHz - optimum 5-7 day, 2-4 night, max 8. 15%<Critical freq
Ionosonde reports

Actual results observed - greyline effect

For loop - horizontal polarization more useful, and nodes less noticeable

Going forward:
Urban noise still an issue
Making loop more robust for portability and wind
Increased height and tuneability

Demonstration operating? Proximity absorption testing?






Exhibits

1. Loop
2. Experimental set up - demo / volunteers to do
3. NEC model and various views
4. Equivalent circuits for dielectric and eddy current absorption
5. Graph of experimental results (7 and 10?)
6. Graph of model results for loop
7. Graph of dipole by height
8. Graph of inverted V by height and with reflector
9. Graphic of evanescence (wiki?)
10. Graphs of effects on dipole of various soils (article)
11. Graph of radiation intensity by direction (convert to linear power)
12. Graphic of D/E/F layers (wiki)
13. MUF and critical frequency map (internet)
14. Radiosonde graphic 



